From The New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
As the war on Iran enters its second
week, concerns about a global energy
crisis are growing. In the last week, as
Iran tightened its chokehold on one of
the world's most vital shipping routes,
and the Trump administration sent mixed
signals about how long the war would
last. Oil was on another roller coaster
again today. Oil prices have swung
wildly. It shot up like a geyser to $119
a barrel.
>> But they surged to their highest levels
in years. Today, oil prices closed down
about 9% at $86 a barrel. And then
suddenly plunged.
>> The war with Iran is impacting 20%, a
fifth of the world's oil supply, making
this the worst oil disruption the world
has ever experienced.
Today, my colleague Rebecca Elliott on
how the volatility has exposed just how
much the world depends on the narrow
waterway at the center of the growing
crisis, the Strait of Hormuz, and how
quickly shutting that strait down can
throw global energy markets into utter
chaos.
It's Wednesday, March 11th.
Rebecca, welcome to The Daily. First
time on the show. Thank you for being
here.
>> Yeah, thanks so much for having me,
Natalie. So, we are coming to you
because you are, I think it's fair to
say, an undisputed authority on oil here
at The Times. And over the last week,
the concerns over the war in the Middle
East have grown to include not just a
very real and dangerous conflict, but
also building panic over a potential
global energy crisis stemming from that
conflict. And all of that worry has
focused on this one shipping route that
butts up against Iran, which is the
Strait of Hormuz. So, tell us about that
strait.
The strait sits between Iran to the
north and then Oman, United Arab
Emirates to the south. It is essentially
a choke point through which about a
fifth of the world's oil and a lot of
natural gas normally goes every day.
Mhm. It allows oil and gas from the
Persian Gulf to reach world markets. And
the challenge with the strait is that
it's really narrow. It's only about 21
mi wide at its narrowest point. And the
shipping lanes are even smaller.
Oman's Maritime Security Center says an
oil tanker has been attacked in the
Strait of Hormuz injuring four crew old
And so, what has been happening since
this war started is that some vessels
passing through the strait have been
attacked. Attention all ships, attention
all ships, attention all ships. From now
on,
all navigating through the Strait of
Hormuz is forbidden. No ships in every
time And what you're seeing is that
traffic through the strait has just
slowed to a trickle. While this is not
an officially recognized closure,
shipping has been completely stalled in
the strait. For a combination of
reasons. One, physical security. Mhm.
Iran has attacked a number of vessels in
the region since the war started and so
people are worried for their safety.
Sure. Worried about, okay, what happens
if there is an attack on a tanker that
is filled with oil? Revolutionary Guards
commander did say that they will set
fire to any ship trying to pass that is
You also have a lot of insurance
companies saying, you know what? This
isn't for us." Right? So, it's a lot
harder and a lot more expensive to get
the kind of financial backing that you
would want to make this journey.
Okay, and you said these tankers are
backed up. What's the fallout of that?
So, what you have is vessels essentially
waiting stuck on either side of the
strait. Stranded. Stranded. Tankers
can't get in to pick up the oil and gas
that they're meant to. And they can't
get out. And so, that means that a huge
amount of energy is not reaching world
markets.
More than 80% of the oil and what is
known as liquefied natural gas, this is
gas that has been cooled so that it can
be put on a ship. More than 80% of that
from this region normally goes to Asia.
Wow. And so, without being able to count
on that energy arriving soon,
you're starting to see prices rise
really dramatically.
And oil prices have been really volatile
since the war started. And one of the
starkest examples of that happened this
past Sunday evening into Monday, when
you saw prices swing by as much as I
think around $30 a barrel, which is a
lot. Which is a lot, right? So, prices
on Sunday night reached above $100 a
barrel for the first time since 2022,
which of course was kind of in the
aftermath of Russia's invasion of
Ukraine. Yep. And they really swung a
huge amount throughout the day as people
tried to figure out how long is this war
going to last. How long is it going to
remain difficult to get oil out of the
Persian Gulf? And people trying to read
the tea leaves of President Trump's
remarks about the war. Which seem to
change every day. It seems like we get a
new piece of information from Trump,
sometimes contradictory information
about how long this is going to go on.
Yeah, it's really unclear sitting here
today what exactly the goal posts are.
And the answer to that question means a
lot for the energy market. Gasoline has
gotten more expensive, diesel has gotten
more expensive in the US. So, it's more
expensive to fill up your car than it
was before the war started.
And you're seeing governments in many
parts of the world start to make policy
changes.
>> Mhm. Ration energy. Some really good
examples that my colleagues have written
about in the last few days is,
you know, South Korea said it would cap
prices at the pump for the first time in
almost 30 years. Wow. India temporarily
suspended cremations using gas.
>> Mhm. So, you're seeing governments
basically try to fast track energy
efficiency measures and kind of
implement other tools meant to prevent
them from running out. Right. They're
trying to basically limit their usage
for now as much as possible. Exactly.
Many countries that depend on energy
from outside of their borders are
saying, "We might not be able to count
on getting more, so let's do the best we
can with what we have now." Right. And
as the conflict has dragged on and on,
the conversation seems to have turned
much more to the possibility that what
we may be looking at is a genuine oil
shock, a genuine supply shock. And I
think one of the main questions that
people are asking is how bad is this
going to get? Honestly, anyone's guess.
It is so hard to predict oil prices. And
in trying to answer this question,
I've been thinking a lot about the oil
shocks that the world experienced in the
1970s.
So, 1973,
Israel was in a war against Egypt and
Syria. The United States backed Israel.
World wars among big powers are quite
possible to control dwindling oil
supplies. And in response, the Arab
members of an oil cartel known as OPEC
cut the US off from oil produced in that
region. The Middle East war produced
developments all over the world today.
The oil-producing countries of the Arab
world decided to use their oil as a
political weapon. They would So,
overnight, the United States lost access
to a tremendous amount of oil. If the
Arab countries keep that pledge, it
would reduce their production by almost
50% in 1 year. Members of OPEC at the
time were also raising prices. And so,
what you saw between October 1973
and early that following year was oil
prices quadrupled. Just extraordinary.
>> Which is just extraordinary. And so, the
shocks to economies around the world
were huge.
To increase the supply of heating oil
that will be available this winter, we
must adjust production schedules and
divert petroleum, which might normally
go for the production of gasoline, to
the production of more heating oil. In
the Dallas area today, dealers raised
prices to more than 40 cents a gallon.
Not only was energy a lot more expensive
almost overnight, there also wasn't
enough of it. Well, my son is trying to
see how much gas we have left in the
tank.
In order that we can make it out on the
Saw Mill River Parkway. So, he stuck his
walkie-talkie antenna in the tank, which
I do not see we're going to get out.
And so, you had fuel rationing. Now, you
willing to slow down to 50 miles an
hour?
>> No. Why not? Cuz it's stupid, you know,
and I The government implemented a
nationwide 55-mph
speed limit on US highways. I've been in
two gas lines already. This morning?
>> This morning. How long did you wait for
the first one?
>> And in both lines, over an hour, and I'm
out of gas.
Dead out. Really long lines to get
gasoline. This is unreal. Isn't this
disgusting? Why doesn't anybody contact
the president? Why is he letting this
happen to us? People were panicking.
Yeah, it's kind of wild to imagine oil
rationing in the United States. Do we
really think that's a possibility today?
How apt is the comparison between that
shock and what we're experiencing now?
The world looks really different today
than it did 50 some years ago.
And that's partly to do with changes
that many countries made in response to
that energy crisis. You had major
efforts to reduce dependency on oil,
whether by figuring out how to use it
more efficiently or by transitioning to
alternative forms of energy. One example
that I just learned about was in Japan
in an effort to try to use air
conditioning less. The Prime Minister
pushed for people to start wearing
short-sleeve suits. Apparently, it never
caught on. What an image. I wish it had.
It would be kind of an interesting look.
>> Definitely. You know, those are some
examples of ways that countries tried to
use less oil. Fuel economy standards are
a legacy of that moment. And you also
saw many places shift toward
alternatives such as nuclear energy. And
this is, you know, really motivated by
concerns about energy security. You're
saying the shift toward prioritizing
things like fuel efficiency in cars,
toward drawing on other fuel sources,
that's primarily about countries trying
to secure their own energy independence,
trying to protect themselves essentially
from a repetition of what happened in
1973. Right. And in the US, one of the
biggest differences is that the country
went from being a net importer of oil to
a net exporter today. And how did that
happen? Fracking. Drilling down
horizontally under the earth and
fracturing the rock to let oil and gas
come up.
And this really revolutionized the US
oil and gas industry and helped the
country become the world's top producer
of oil and gas, passing Saudi Arabia,
passing Russia. And this, in combination
with the build-out of renewables in
recent years, has made the country much
less dependent on oil and gas from the
Gulf than it used to be. Basically,
since 1973, the whole world, in response
to that crisis has become a lot less
dependent on oil, relatively speaking.
And the US in particular has become much
less dependent on foreign countries for
the oil that it does consume. That's
right. Things look very different today
than they did in the 1970s.
Oil meets a much smaller share of the
world's energy needs.
That said, it still matters in big ways
for the economy. Oil and gas are used
for a whole lot of things that we need
every day.
Producing electricity, producing
gasoline and diesel and jet fuel. So,
when you don't have access to those
fuels, it ripples through the global
economy in ways that will get much worse
the longer the strait remains
effectively closed.
We'll be right back.
Rebecca, you've made it clear that the
effects of this building crisis are
going to compound, are going to get
worse and worse each day that the
shutdown continues. You told us earlier
that there were currently many ships
just stranded, waiting to pass through
the Strait of Hormuz with very few
actually making it. What is the outlook
for those stranded tankers? Barring the
war ending, is there any way this
situation changes in the strait in the
near term?
The strait is one of Iran's very big
points of leverage. And Iran has said
that it will attack vessels that go
through.
And so, it's hard to imagine the
situation shifting considerably in the
near term.
The United States, President Trump, have
floated some ideas. During this brief
disruption, the United States is
offering political risk insurance to any
tankers operating in the Gulf. So, we're
One being providing additional insurance
options. will uh
perhaps
go alongside of them for protection. We
don't think it'll be necessary. If it
is,
>> The other being a naval escort for
tankers through the strait. And if they
do anything, the price will be
incalculable. So far, the US has not
escorted a vessel through the strait.
>> Mhm. So, we'll see. But, remember, if
you're a mariner, Iran has committed to
disrupting the strait. Yeah. Several
tankers have been attacked. A shipyard
worker died in Bahrain. There are huge
physical risks here at the moment
associated with making this journey. And
I think until that changes, whatever
that looks like, it's still going to be
very difficult to get energy out of the
Persian Gulf. So, what about the oil
companies? Obviously, this is a huge
problem for them, too. They have all
this oil just sitting around, and they
can't get it to where it's supposed to
go. That's right. And they're running
out of places to put it. Storage tanks
are filling up. And so, you've started
to see countries throughout the region
cut back production, turn off wells, and
reduce refinery processing. So, that
means they're turning less oil into
gasoline and diesel and other products.
And just explain, Rebecca, why it's such
a big deal that they are turning off the
spigot. What does that actually mean?
It's not the same thing as turning off
your faucet where when you turn it back
on, water just comes right back out
again. It's called shutting in a well.
When you do that, you can risk damaging
the well essentially. And so when you
try to turn it back on, maybe there's
not enough pressure. Not as much oil is
going to come out. And so the risk is
that these disruptions last longer than
the war. And what countries are going to
be most affected by what's happening?
Who's going to feel it first and most
deeply?
I'm going to oversimplify and divide the
world between producers and consumers.
>> Mhm. If we're talking about the
consuming countries,
many of those that are going to be
affected fastest are those in Asia, for
example, that depend really heavily on
imported oil and natural gas.
And then on the producer side, it's the
countries that can't get anything out.
One of the countries that acted really
quickly was Qatar, which is uh huge
natural gas producer and exporter.
And within days of the start of the war,
they decided to stop cooling natural gas
for export. Hm. That caused prices
basically immediately to rise
considerably in Europe and in Asia.
Right, these are pretty major decisions,
right? I mean, it's not just major for
the countries that produce it, it's the
countries that are depending on it. It
has an immediate impact. Absolutely. And
remember, oil markets in particular are
global. So, even though in the United
States we produce tremendous amounts of
oil, we're still affected by higher
prices elsewhere. Right. Just because
we're not dependent on the strait in the
same way, we are still affected by the
disruption to it and the chaos that it
unleashes on the market.
And to that end, Rebecca, is there
anything the administration could do to
limit the potential impact of all this
on consumers in the US, especially as
the war keeps going on?
The Trump administration has a few
options.
One of the first is what's known as the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve. So, going
back to the oil crisis in 1973,
after that the US created a strategic
stockpile of oil. And so, in moments
like these,
the US has the option of releasing some
of that oil into the market. And that
has been kind of an active conversation
in recent days, not just in the US, but
among other countries known as the G7.
Another option that would have
uh potentially limited effect would be
to temporarily lift the gasoline tax,
which would save people 18 cents on a
gallon. So, that would take some of the
pressure off. And in a very extreme
scenario, you could see Congress
stepping in to ban oil exports.
That type of a ban was actually in place
until 2015. Oh, You couldn't export oil
from the US and then Congress lifted
that during the Obama administration
as the US became the biggest oil
producer in the world largely because of
fracking.
I haven't kind of heard that as being
a realistic scenario or quite on the
table yet, but that is the kind of
extreme option that the US might have.
Okay, so not a lot on the table and what
is available that could make a real
difference maybe quite radical. What
about longer-term solutions here? I'm
thinking about the 1973
oil embargo and how that compelled many
countries including the US to reduce
their dependence on oil. Do you see this
crisis as having a similar potential
effect forcing policy makers, lawmakers
to rethink their energy needs, to
redesign them?
In other words, what do you think the
long-term lessons of this crisis could
be?
That's going to depend a lot on how long
this situation lasts, how high energy
prices get, and how long they stay
there.
In a scenario where they remain
expensive for a long time, I think that
thinking about 1973
and the aftermath is instructive. Big
events like this do tend to change
behavior, change how people think about
energy.
The reaction may be different in the
United States, which is very rich in oil
and gas. Right, and where Trump has been
very adverse to these alternative fuel
sources. I mean, it's hard to imagine
him jumping back into renewables in a
way that we'd been seeing in the past.
Right, this is all happening as the
Trump administration is making it more
difficult to install solar panels and
wind turbines and other equipment that
would enable us to harness the sun and
harness the wind. So, I think the
reaction will differ regionally, but in
countries that are really dependent on
foreign sources of oil and natural gas,
they may think more seriously about,
"Okay, how do we move to alternatives
perhaps even more quickly than we were
before?" But you have to wonder, or at
least I do, whether in this case,
people, policy makers, lawmakers, just
end up looking at this episode and
blaming Trump and Israel for it, for all
the disruption that has followed from
the initial attack. Like, this appears,
I think, to many as a war of choice. And
and those strikes are what prompted all
of this. And so, it seems possible that
there would be some reticence to see
this as revealing some sort of
structural problem, and more of a
willingness to see it as potentially a
one-off attributable to these two
leaders in this moment and their
decisions.
It's certainly possible,
but what I think has been very clear
over the last several days and weeks
is that this huge risk that energy
experts have been talking and thinking
about for years, the risk that the
Strait of Hormuz would close is now
playing out in real time.
I think it's hard to imagine that people
just go back and say, "Okay, this is
fine."
People remember gas prices. It's one of
those things that is in your face all
the time, every day. Right. And it's
hard to imagine that especially if
prices rise further and stay there for a
long time, that it won't shape and
change how people think about energy.
It's exposing a big vulnerability in the
global energy system.
And we know from price shocks in the
past that when events like this happen,
people change. The whole world changes.
Well, Rebecca, thank you so much. Thank
you for having me.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
The US military said on Tuesday evening
that it had attacked 16 Iranian
mine-laying vessels near the Strait of
Hormuz.
Earlier in the day, Trump had threatened
Iran over reports that mines were being
deployed in the Strait.
The news capped off a day of confusion
about the viability and security of the
passageway.
After the US energy secretary posted on
social media that a navy warship had
successfully escorted a tanker through
the Strait, oil prices plunged in a sign
of new optimism about the route opening
up.
But then shortly afterward, a military
official said that hadn't happened. The
social media post was deleted, and
prices went back up.
And on Capitol Hill, I emerge from this
briefing
as dissatisfied
and angry, frankly, as I have from any
past briefing in my 15 years in the
Senate. After receiving a classified
briefing from Trump officials on the
war, Senate Democrats warned that the
administration was not close to
achieving its goals. We seem to be on a
path
toward deploying American troops on the
ground
in Iran. And demanded public hearings on
the objectives and end game for the war.
>> This is a disaster of epic proportions.
It's already getting Americans killed.
It's driving up prices here at home.
This has just been a debacle. Uh a
10-day debacle. And airstrikes continued
in Lebanon on Tuesday, where Israel's
mass evacuation orders and bombing
campaign have made the country a new
front in the expanding war.
A humanitarian crisis is looming there,
and the United Nations has said that
700,000 people in Lebanon have been
displaced from their homes.
The Pentagon said on Tuesday that
Iranian airstrikes had wounded 140 US
service members, in addition to the
seven US service members who have been
killed.
Today's episode was produced by Caitlin
O'Keefe, Diana Wynn, and Nina Feldman.
It was edited by Devon Taylor and Lisa
Chow, and contains music by Dan Powell
and Marion Lozano. Our theme music is by
Wonderly. This episode was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley.
That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.